the trial and execution of socrates took
place in the context of a wave of
reprisal killings
people were being killed
to get even for atrocities committed by
the short-lived government of the 30
tyrants
was socrates complicit
were his students and colleagues
complicit
in our century socrates has become a
powerful cultural symbol
but what exactly
does he symbolize
you could say
that in france
napoleon bonaparte is a powerful symbol
you could say that in the united states
of america
george washington is a powerful symbol
but if you ask people
why
what meaning does this symbol have why
is this
so important to people who can tell you
with any certainty with any
self-confidence what the philosophy of
napoleon bonaparte was or why it still
matters to this day who can speak at any
length or any depth about what george
washington means to them
personally or even politically in the
simplest sense of the term people live
with a cartoonish notion of who socrates
was who plato was or why they ever
mattered if these cartoonish notions
were true
they wouldn't matter at all
socrates was a political dissident
socrates was a religious dissident
and it got him killed
and that
is why his story still
matters
very few people and very few university
professors treat this subject with the
seriousness it deserves
in our generation people seem to care
very little what the historical
significance of napoleon was
what his philosophy was
of what is political significance was we
treat him as a malleable symbol of
greatness
as a sort of anonymized faceless
all-purpose placeholder for the great
man whether we're using him as a pawn
in presenting french nationalism or
perhaps presenting the clash between
modernity and medieval traditionalism
it's a very strange recklessness we have
in looking back at history and taking
bits and pieces of it and liberally
reinterpreting it and applying it
however seems convenient for our own
political interests at this moment in
time and then isn't there an interesting
change in tone when we look at a
phenomenon like jordan peterson's very
loose
very liberal reinterpretation of the
historical significance of adolf hitler
suddenly we become uncomfortable
suddenly we start to insist that the
facts of history must matter that
deceased historical figures are not
merely play things to be deployed in any
way that might be politically convenient
for us today there can be no doubt the
single greatest source of influence and
the single greatest source of bias
in the reinterpretation and retelling of
the myth of socrates
has been the christian bible has been
the mythological figure
of jesus christ if you've had the
misfortune of studying philosophy at a
western university in all likelihood
your professors did not consciously
think that they were going to
misinterpret or misrepresent socrates so
that his story resembled that of jesus
as much as possible but very much the
framing and presentation of the story of
his trial his death his execution it is
presented as one of martyrdom
martyrdom to a philosophy yes martyrdom
to a very different conception of god
there's tremendous emphasis placed on
this notion that socrates was faultless
and blameless not
as an intellectual dissident not as a
religious dissident not as someone who
was part of a political conspiracy to
transform the society he was a part of
but instead he is represented as a
sacrificial lamb the trial and execution
of socrates took place in the context of
a wave of reprisal killings
people were being killed to get even
for atrocities committed by the
short-lived government of the 30 tyrants
at that time in athens people were going
to court trying to sue one another
trying to get money from one another
and trying to kill each other
over the question of who was complicit
in the government of the 30 tyrants
was socrates complicit
were his students and colleagues
complicit an author named lysius
provides compelling primary source
evidence of court cases of this kind i
am saying primary source
because these are not later reflections
on the court cases these are actually
speeches that were written by lysius to
be presented in court these documents or
these affidavits i could say show people
trying to defend themselves against the
accusation that they were complicit in
the rule of the thirty tyrants and they
also show the opposite they show
allegations and denunciations being made
connecting people to the 30 tyrants
socrates was not the only man being
forced to drink hemlock in athens
people were being persecuted people were
being questioned people were being
cross-examined about what side they had
been on
in the tumultuous period of athens
reverting from democracy to aristocracy
and then fighting a bitter civil war to
re-establish democracy thereafter if you
take a moment to pause and read the text
on screen here and indeed the slide just
before that i've shown you you will get
a sense of just how intense and just how
passionate these courtroom battles were
people wanted one way or another to get
even and as you will learn in this brief
video the people they were trying to get
even with were precisely socrates and
his students
my point here is not to portray socrates
as a revolutionary
certainly he was not a revolutionary
leader in the sense that george
washington was he was also not a
revolutionary leader in the sense that
robespierre was or napoleon bonaparte
was
no
but it is completely ridiculous to think
of socrates as a christ-like figure what
would anyone say about jesus christ if
his disciples had participated in a coup
d'etat if they had come into power and
destroyed democracy by colluding with a
foreign army in the same way that the
students of socrates were able to
effectively collude with the spartans to
take over the government of athens this
is not some minor footnote in the
history of philosophy and it is
certainly not a minor footnote in the
political history of athens it is a
momentous tremendous event
that implicates socrates plato xenophon
all of the famous names on this list in
the 50 years leading up to the death of
socrates there can be no doubt that the
single most powerful most influential
and important political figure
was pericles
in the text that we have socrates was an
incredibly harsh critic
of pericles and yet simultaneously he
was the closest companion of alcabiatis
and alcibiades was adopted by pericles
legally speaking he was raised by
pericles as his son
he was groomed to be a major political
leader and indeed he would go on to
become a major political leader he was
prepared to be a major military leader
and in the 25 years or so of combat with
sparta alcabiatis would indeed
be a tremendously important military
leader as well however
at this time in just the last few years
leading up to the death of socrates
alcabiatis had become intensely hated
and in the records that we have of court
cases preserved by lysius we can see
that the name and reputation of
alcabiatis is being used to dam and
condemn people to be a close associate
of alcabiatis would be enough to get you
killed in the period of reprisals
following after the short-lived tyranny
of the thirty now the relationship
between socrates and democracy is
complicated
the relationship between al qaeda's and
democracy
is complicated but at this time
politically it was not perceived
as complicated we have here a quotation
from a court case concerning the son of
alcabiatis a son who had the same first
name and you can see that in court it is
being stated that if any of you
gentlemen of the jury if any of you
resent the government of the thirty
tyrants you should blame this man
because his father was the cause of all
this now i would not say to you anything
so simplistic as to claim that
alcabiatis personally was responsible
for the government of the thirty tyrants
but this is the way it was perceived
this was a time at which having your
name closely associated with alcabiatis
could politically entail your ruin it
could even entail your trial and death
now tell me
who
was more closely associated with
alcabiatis than socrates the elephant in
the room here is pedophilia
the elephant in the room here is what we
call pederasty in ancient athens
it is very clear from a notorious text
written by plato called plato's
symposium
that socrates and alcabiatis were
commonly perceived to be gay lovers to
have a homosexual relationship and this
was around the time when al-qaeda's was
20 years of age allegedly
that text although about the first half
of it might as well be a manifesto for
pedophiles the conclusion where we
actually hear the perspective of alka
biatis himself and of socrates himself
it specifies that they had what we would
now call a platonic relationship that in
fact they were not gay lovers but they
lived in a culture that was accepting of
this peculiar
kind of age-gap relationship to such an
extent that the close relationship
socrates and alcubiadis had was
perceived as what we might now call a
gay marriage
the name of alcubiadis has not remained
famous in the same way that the name of
plato has down to this day he is however
a somewhat romanticized figure at least
amongst people with phds because he was
the student of the philosophy of
socrates who went on to have a
spectacular military career a
spectacular political career even if it
was a career that was largely disastrous
and ended with spectacular failure the
next two names on this list have been
utterly forgotten
kritius and theramenis
at that time these would have been the
most famous the most infamous the most
notorious
people in athens because they had been
disciples of socrates and they went on
to become the founders of and the
leaders of the government of 30 tyrants
at first criteus and theriminis shared
the same views and were personal friends
but when criteus acting as one who had
himself been exiled by the democracy
began to show this lust for putting
people to death theramenis opposed him
there is no sense he said in putting a
man to death simply because he has been
honored by the democracy and when he has
done the aristocracy no harm at all
at this stage criteus was still on
friendly terms of ceremonies it is he
said quite impossible for those who want
to gain power to avoid getting rid of
those people who are most likely to form
an opposition to it
and it is pure simplicity on your part
if you think that just because we are 30
and not one we have to keep a less close
watch on the government than is done by
an absolute dictator
so more and more people were put to
death
and put to death unjustly these names
may not be famous now but if you had
been alive at that time if you had been
a citizen of athens who participated in
the trial and execution of socrates
these names would have seemed very
famous indeed criteus and theriminis
were disciples of socrates they were
close friends with both socrates and
plato
and they had colluded with an enemy army
they had colluded with the army of
sparta to carry out a coup d'etat to
create a new system of government in
which the two of them sat at the top the
two of them were the most powerful
dictators or the most powerful
demagogues the two of them killed others
and then after they had a falling out
they turned against each other
and critias killed thereminis
quote when the attendants came forward
and were dragging him off therimenes
bore his bad fortune with a noble spirit
since indeed he had no little
acquaintance with philosophy in company
with socrates
the multitude however in general mourned
the ill fortune of thereminis but had
not the courage to come to his aid since
a strong armed guard stood around him
now socrates the philosopher and two of
his intimates ran forward and endeavored
to hinder the attendance but theramenis
entreated them to do nothing of the kind
he appreciated he said their friendship
and bravery but as for himself it would
be the greatest grief if he should be
the cause of the death of those who were
so intimately associated with him
socrates and his helpers since they had
no aid from anyone else and saw the
intransigence of those in authority
increasing made no move
then those who had received their orders
dragged ceremonies from the altar and
hustled him through the center of the
marketplace to his execution
and the populace terror stricken at the
arms of the garrison the garrison of
spartan soldiers i might add
were filled with pity for the
unfortunate man and shed tears not only
over his fate but also over their own
slavery
for all the common sort when they saw a
man of such virtuous ceremonies treated
with such contumely
had concluded that they in their
weakness would be sacrificed without a
thought
the most basic problem with this passage
politically
is that it has socrates and his
followers in the same room
with ceremonies and criteus
this is very much depicting
socrates plato and his followers his
followers including the two men who were
dictators at this time ceremonies and
criticism
it's depicting them as all being on the
same side and inside this government
that so soon became hated for its
corruption and brutality this regime
that was torn down by a
pro-democratic revolution a
pro-democratic revolution that socrates
plato etc were all on the wrong side of
plato goes on living for a long time
after socrates and most of the other
names in that list
so naturally he had to create some kind
of deeply dishonest justification for
what his role in this notorious
dictatorship was
nevertheless even in clearing his name
he implicates himself he implicates
socrates and he further illustrates for
us the context within which as i say
socrates must die
quote the existing constitution
democracy being generally condemned a
revolution took place and there were
appointed rulers with full powers over
public affairs as a whole
some of these were relatives and
acquaintances of mine
they at once invited me to share in
their doings as something to which i had
a claim
the effect on me was not surprising in
the case of a young man i considered
that they would of course so manage the
state as to bring men out of a bad way
of life into a good one so i watched
them very closely to see what they would
do and seeing as i did that in quite a
short time they made the former
government democracy seemed by
comparison something as precious as gold
dot dot dot close quote the problem with
this passage politically is that plato
is admitting to you that he and his
friends and relatives were indeed
members of the dictatorship of the 30
from the start that he himself was
indeed part of this
pro-aristocratic anti-democratic
conspiracy
plato is a profoundly biased source
plato is trying to save his own skin
plato is trying in some ways to protect
the reputation of socrates in retrospect
xenophon
is a profoundly biased source he is
engaged in the glorification of socrates
and to some extent he's trying to
rationalize politically what sparta did
he was in the strange position of being
an athenian who switched sides and
started fighting for sparta it is only
in those primary source texts preserved
by lysius that we get a sense of just
how nasty the political circumstances
really were and the depth of hatred that
was directed towards socrates himself
and his followers in athens at that time
and we get a sense of the extent to
which that hatred was well earned it was
deserved plato wasn't just defending his
reputation for no reason at all
both thereminis and criteus were
disciples of socrates and keep in mind
the name of criteus even appears in the
dialogues of plato that were written to
glorify socrates although the short
quotation i read you from xenophon a
minute ago makes it seem as if
theramentes had the most pious of
intentions in carrying out this coup
d'etat making himself a dictator and
destroying democracy whereas kritius was
really the bad guy if you take a moment
to read this quotation from a court case
from lysius you will instead have the
sense that there are many should not be
glorified for having been killed by the
system of government he created himself
he should instead be blamed for his
collusion with the spartans his
conspiracy with an enemy army to bring
about the creation of that terrible new
form of government in the first place a
form of government that again plato and
socrates were both involved in they were
both implicated in but plato at least
later admitted was an absolutely
terrible system of government a
government so bad that looking back at
it now it makes democracy seem better by
comparison
when we evaluate socrates and his
disciples as political leaders in their
political context
how many of these men were pro-spartan
or
how many of them
appeared to be
how many of these men were pro-oligarchy
or
how many of them appeared to be and
conversely
how many of them can be simply and
unironically said to be pro-democracy
how many of them were fighting against
oligarchy against elitism against the
aristocracy taking their stand with the
common people who wanted democracy and
wanted to kick the spartans out there
seems to be a very loosely organized
conspiracy of professors and people with
phds that prevents these questions from
ever being asked some of you may be
shocked or you may pretend to be shocked
and my assertion that we have to
evaluate socrates as a political leader
and we have to evaluate his students as
political leaders some of you may be
burdened with this misconception that
socrates only went around
preaching personal virtue private
morality that he wasn't a political
dissident at all that he wasn't a
religious dissonant at all that he
wasn't trying to change the society he
was a part of and that he wasn't trying
to take over the government well if you
feel that way it probably reflects the
selected readings you were assigned from
within the extant corpus of texts i
would direct you to two very large very
long very boring attacks written by
plato himself the gorgius and first
alcabiatis here we see very clearly
that socrates does think of himself
as a politician that he does think of
himself as a statesman that he does
think of himself as a dissident
political leader and that he says
directly to al qaeda's the adopted son
of pericles that he
socrates is now the only true political
leader athens has and that in effect
alchemiadi should follow him alcubia
should take on his philosophy as part
and parcel of his own peculiar path to
power it is very clear in the gorgeous
and first alcabiatis that socrates
wasn't just friends with the
conspirators who happened to take over
the leadership of the government he had
his own political agenda i said before
that he could be condemned to death just
for being in the room when some of those
decisions were made by the government of
the 30 tyrants well if you're willing to
read these texts with open eyes and an
open mind and an open heart i think
you'll inevitably come to the conclusion
that he was in that room
for a reason
socrates was not just a passive observer
of politics in his times he was an
active participant although the figures
who wrote the history or at least some
of them
like xenophon and plato were trying to
rescue his reputation from the disaster
that was the government of the thirty
tyrants a government created by and
ruled by
two of socrates's own students a
government that both socrates and plato
participated in even if they would later
come to regret it and to try to portray
themselves as instead the friends of
democracy a game that was played by
alcabiatis again and again until frankly
he had used up all of his credibility
and had become hated by both his allies
and his enemies alike i do not celebrate
christmas
starting in the winter of 2018
i created this alternative holiday
called sock mess because fundamentally i
felt embarrassed to involve my own
daughter in the celebration of christmas
in the recitation again and again of
what i fundamentally think is a
meaningless if not pernicious story
about this mythological figure jesus
christ
however you will have figured out by now
if you've been watching this video from
beginning to end
i do not really look up to socrates as
my personal hero
i certainly do not regard him as a
christ-like idealized mythological
figure nor am i interested in creating a
new mythology to glorify him i think we
live in a culture
where so many of the stories
we recite as we put our children to bed
or as they sit in front of the
television
are frankly meaningless
not this one the story of socrates it's
meaningful there's so much we can learn
from it there's so many different angles
from which it can be analyzed
and there's something really worth
explaining really worth reflecting on
there for the next generation even if
you conclude that socrates is more of a
villain than he is a hero if any of you
in the audience today want to influence
the future of your parliamentary
democracy
the best method you've got at your
disposal is probably to start recording
youtube videos or perhaps writing
letters to the editor that will be
published in the local newspaper for men
like socrates and his closest followers
including al qaeda's including chris
taking over the leadership of the
government was a very real option and in
the case of alcubiatis and in the case
of criteus they didn't just talk about
doing it for a short time they did it
just as thucydides had warned the people
of athens thought of themselves as
living in a democracy but in fact they
lived in a city that was at any one time
ruled by just one man by its most
preeminent citizen
by whatever demagogue was best able to
move the crowd socrates
was a man of his times he did not
transcend them
he lived in a society
that genuinely had
direct democracy
and we don't
and it's that contrast that makes all of
these things so important for us to
reflect on now as we evaluate what the
future of modern western parliamentary
democracy should be who was going to be
the next pericles
quite possibly algae biatis
quite possibly socrates
himself they lived in a society where
any well-spoken well-educated man could
stand up at the penins could stand up in
the public forum
and quite rapidly find himself in a
position of real political power and
real military power
however
he did so at every stage
at the risk of his own life
in this video i've repeatedly quoted for
you legal texts written by lysius
there's one text i didn't quote that
gives a tremendously bleak and realistic
look at political conditions in athens
at that time when it reflects
ladies and gentlemen of the jury
it was all gentlemen i confess gentlemen
of the jury
we've just lived through a period of
time where everybody had changed sides
two three four times we've known people
who used to support the democracy but
then as soon as their own interest was
at stake as soon as it was their own
family or they had some way to profit
they started supporting the aristocracy
we've known other people who had an
earlier phase were part of a
pro-aristocratic coup d'etat and then
later they fought and died heroically in
a pro-democratic revolution the whole
city of athens knew what it was like to
live through a period of tumult of chaos
of death of war yes but also of
tremendous opportunity this kind of
opportunity frankly corrupted socrates
it corrupted plato it corrupted xenophon
alcabiatis chris and the rest and it
corrupted them in a way that they were
not even fully aware of themselves
they were corrupted by the very real
possibility of holding in their own
hands political power and we
all of us in this audience right now
we've lived our whole lives without ever
knowing that kind of temptation instead
we live with the depressing acceptance
of the fact that whatever we may say
whatever we may write
really will never make a difference in
the world whereas in that society with
direct democracy whatever they might
stand up and say could have real
consequences of life and death
for themselves and others i'm gonna ask
you to take a moment and share the link
to this video with someone else who
could stand to learn something from it
because before a few weeks ago
i had never heard of deodoris i had
never heard of lysius i had never heard
of the seventh epistle of plato the
primary sources are kind of hidden in
plain sight
we live in a culture where people who
have
university education
are more ignorant about these things
than those who lack it because we mostly
learn about socrates we mostly learn
about plato
through the university reader
a selection of short passages that makes
you feel that you've read plato makes
you feel that you know plato when you
haven't read the gorgeous you haven't
read the first documentaries you haven't
read any of the sources we've quoted in
this video you've become familiar
with a few block quotations from the
republic a few
carefully selected
extracts of text
that knowingly or unknowingly
serve the professor's political agenda
and this is the alternative
we can take socrates back from academia
we can present our children with
something more meaningful than christmas
more meaningful than batman and x-men
and supermen
but something more meaningful than what
we encountered at elite levels of
education ourselves
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice